today we're going to get into data
structures for Big Data System design
interviews typically aren't getting into
the implementation of algorithms but
certain problems require approximations
or clever approaches knowing about some
of these data structures enables you to
solve some otherwise intractable
problems and your interviewer is likely
to give you points for using them
appropriately before I dive in I want to
offer a caveat for newer Engineers it's
better to focus on doing the basics well
than to for example pull a blue filter
into your design incorrectly or
inappropriately aim for Simplicity and
solve for the bottlenecks when you can
justify them I.E when you have those
estimates rather than
solving imaginary scaling problems with
that let's get into three data
structures for Big Data our first data
structure is the ever popular Bloom
filter Bloom filters approximate sets if
you recall sets allow us to add items
and test their membership in constant
time Bloom filters do basically the same
thing but Bloom filters are dramatically
more space efficient requiring an order
of magnitude or more less space than a
simple hashset this space Advantage
comes with a curse Bloom filters are
probabilistic and they can't answer with
the same certainty as the hash set
specifically Bloom filters allow me to
add items and they can answer in one of
two ways either the item is likely in
the set with some configurable
probability or the element is definitely
not in the set this sounds a little
goofy so let's build up some intuition
about how this works before we dive into
the system design applications let's
pretend that we want to keep track of
the names of people who have attended a
meeting if we've got Infinite Space then
our ideal strategy is to assign each
name and identifier maybe an index so
Albert gets zero Brian gets one
Christina gets two Zed gets 25 then we
can have is an array of bits which are
either zero or one you can think of this
like booleans and then when Albert
attends we can change his value to one
it's really easy for us to figure out
now who's attended the meeting and who
hasn't on the other hand if we want to
save some space we may not have all of
these slots so what can we do now well
maybe instead of assigning these
sequential identifiers we can hash them
we can their input so we can hash Albert
and take a modulo in this case we will
modulo four that would give us some
random value so Albert might get three
Brian might get two Christina might get
three and Zed might get one what happens
now well when we add Albert to our set
we get three here and when we add Brian
to our set we want to change the bit for
two now when we analyze our resulting
data structure something surprising is
happening here we can say that for
instance Zed did not attend this meeting
if Zed had attended that bit would have
been flipped on the other hand we can't
say for sure that Christina attended the
meeting because both Albert and
Christina share the same value so we've
saved on Space here but we've
compromised on our ability to say with
certainty who is in the set now in
practice a bloom filter is going to be a
little bit more comp licated first we
can choose the modulo here which governs
basically how many bits are going to be
required for that hash in this case I
chose four I basically limited myself to
four bits but if I wanted less
collisions I can just add more bits
that's pretty straightforward another
thing that I can do in order to handle
collisions and this is essential to
bloom filters is I can have multiple
hashes so instead of having just a
singular hash where Alber Al Bert and
Christina both have the same value I can
have a second hash where now maybe
Albert and Christina aren't colliding
and what this will allow me to do is
distinguish the two unfortunately by
having a separate hash I also need more
bits so rather than just m bits now I
need M * K bits the choice of M and K
can actually be derived based on some
formulas they're Linked In the
description but essentially what we're
choosing here here is the likelihood of
a collision which is also the likelihood
that we are going to answer yes to a
query about set membership when actually
the item hasn't been added let's talk
about situations where you might want to
use a bloom filter the first one is in a
WebCrawler in a WebCrawler what we're
going to do is we're going to be
continually picking up new web pages
finding new links basically discovering
Pages we haven't crawled yet and then
processing the data for the pages that
we're crawling one of the big
bottlenecks of this system is this
database of crawled Pages that's going
to be constantly queried by our workers
to make sure that they're not recrawling
the same pages over and over both to
check for cycles and then also to make
use of good resources now if we had for
instance a billion URLs in this crawled
Pages database and each of these URLs
was up to a kilobyte of data then we've
got a lot of data let's see billion so
Mega is million Giga is billion and then
we add another thousand so we've got a
terabyte of data specifically just
storing URLs that's kind of a waste so
what we can do instead is we can use a
bloom filter when workers are crawling a
page they can insert into the bloom
filter that URL we're not going to be
able to recall that URL later the bloom
filter is only going to tell us whether
we crawled it or not but that's okay if
we recrawl a page every once in a while
probabilistically that's not a big deal
and instead of storing a terabyte of
data Maybe we store a gigabyte of data
this is a huge savings for a small
performance loss on the tail end to do
the math right Mega another example that
we can talk about is caching usually we
put a cash in front of an expensive
operation and the goal here is both to
make it quicker when we've done it
before but also to reduce the load on
that expensive operation so what often
happens is the service checks the cash
if the cash has the value we're going to
go ahead and return it if the cash
doesn't have the value we've got to go
conduct that expensive operation and
then we can return that back to the user
one problem with this is it means
additional latency for those instances
where we miss on the cash or where we
have to do the expensive operation and
this is a great place for us to
potentially use a bloom filter as an
example if every every time we insert
something into the cache we also add it
to our Bloom filter then our Bloom
filter tells us whether something is
likely or not to be in the cash we can
skip the cash check for those things
that we know they're not going to be
present and move straight to the
expensive operation now this doesn't
work in certain circumstances as an
example if we expect other people to be
populating the cash or if the cash has a
TTL and it's evicting items but you kind
of get the gist here we're looking for
those places where a mistake is not
going to be super costly but we can
benefit in the majority case where we
can be mostly right with a bloom filter
so just to summarize here Bloom filters
are a special data structure that
approximate a set and they can answer in
one of two ways either the item might be
in the set or the item is definitely not
in the set and when it answers it might
be in the set we can configure that
probability by governing how big or
basically how much space the bloom
filter utilizes there's three things to
keep in mind kind of three pitfalls that
we need to be on the lookout for first
of all you obviously need to be quering
for a set membership boom filters aren't
really going to be useful outside of
that the second thing is you need to be
space constrained otherwise you can just
use a hash table memory is actually
relatively cheap a lot of use cases for
a bloom filter aren't strictly necessary
anymore but don't be sloppy and then
lastly you need to be able to tolerate
that false positive rate if you can't
actually make use of those instances
where it might be in the set you're
probably better off using a different
approach our next data structure is
Count B sketch it's basically Bloom
filters with integers instead of bits
the idea behind cman sketch is we
basically allow ourselves to count up
the number of instances or the number of
times we've seen a specific item it
allows us to increment an item and then
also to query the upper bound kind of
like a bloom filter can't tell us for
sure whether an item has come through
cman sketch can't tell us the exact
number of times it's seen an item it
could only tell us the upper bound but
in a lot of cases this can actually be
pretty useful before we get into that
let's explain quickly how this works and
then we'll dive into some use cases so
the way that cman sketch works is very
similar to the bloom filter we're going
to have K hashes and then for each of
those hashes we're going to have a
certain modulo or width this is
basically how many integers we choose to
incorporate into our data structure this
data structure is actually called the
scet so the array of integers that we're
using to store the counts and then the
count Min comes from how we query it
let's walk through an example of adding
to our sketch and then we'll talk a
little bit about how we query it so
let's pretend just like before that
Albert has added one item to our sketch
so we're going to go to our hash one at
index 3 and we're going to increment
that and we're going to look at hash two
at index one we're going to increment
that now let's go ahead and add Brian so
Brian is at hh1 index 2 # 2 index0 and
let's add two for Christina so Christina
# 1 index 3 and then # 2 index 2 so this
is my resulting sketch after adding
Albert once Bri ran once and Christina
twice how do we query this well we query
it much the same way that we do a bloom
filter except what we're going to do is
we're going to take the minimum value
that we find at any of these hash
indexes so for example if I wanted to
find out how often Zed has been added to
the sketch I'll look in hash one at
index one which is a zero and hash two
at index two which is a two so I have
zero and two and I'm going to take the
minimum of those values so in this case
the upper bound on the number of times
Zed has been added to this sketch is
zero which is actually the number of
times he was added similarly with
Christina we're going to look at item
three in hash one which is three and
index two in hash two which is two three
and two we're going to take the minimum
the minimum here is actually two that
means that Christina has been added at
most twice into the sketch now there are
going to be instances where we might
have collisions that basically
accumulate and so it's possible that
this number was actually higher than the
number of times we actually added
Christina to the sketch but it will
never be lower because we are always
incrementing the values and just like
the bloom filter we can choose the width
and number of hashes to basically choose
a Precision for our count Min sketch or
a variance on the S estimate of the
number of times an item has been added a
typical pattern for using cman sketch in
production is a need to keep track of
the top or the highest count items in a
particular set sometimes this is
referred to as a Heavy Hitters problem
and the idea here is every time we get
an event an instance of something we're
going to write into the cman sketch and
then retrieve the resulting estimate for
the count we'll then update a priority
queue with a list of those items so in
most cases if this isn't the most viewed
or most accessed item that priority
queue will be unchanged If instead we
are writing an item that actually is in
that set then we are going to update our
priority queue and what this allows us
to do is query at any time for an
estimate of those top items but doing so
in a way that is very space efficient
this Q length can be bounded by the
number of things that we might want to
retrieve and the cman sketch has a
constant memory usage it just degrades
in accuracy the more we go and so this
can be used in a number of different
situations we might use it in a security
context to keep track of ips that are
producing unusual traffic we don't want
to have to maintain counters for every
IP given there's only going to be a
small number of ips that are actually
going to be producing those problems we
might want to keep track of viral posts
that are happening on social media where
again the tail is long and the counts at
the high end are at the head are very
high another place that we might use
this is in database query optimization
where we want to figure out what are the
most common values or maybe whether a
selection criteria in a query hits
something that we expect to be in many
rows or few rows and finally you'll see
this a lot in fraud and anti-scrape
thing where we're trying to protect
against those instances where the system
is being abused and what we're going to
be looking for are anomalies and
instances where basically the statistics
are out of whack with what we might
expect from a typical user or a
fraudulent user cman sketch can seem
really useful but in production you're
going to find less uses for it than you
might imagine because of the constraints
obviously we need a situation where
we're counting items and querying those
counts but we also have three harder to
satisfy constraints first we need to be
querying against a set of known items
cman sketch doesn't know which items
have been added so they need to be
tracked separately in the heavy hitter
example above we track them in a
priority cue in many cases if we need to
track them separately or exhaustively
we've eliminated the memory benefit of
the sketch so we need to be careful here
the second thing is we need to be
dealing with heavy space constraints you
see this in two places in interviews
either a your interviewer has invented
an imaginary problem like the one
recently asked at meta to build a web
crawler out of raspberry pies or B you
need a constant space data structure for
predictable performance which is common
in real-time systems databases and
operating systems both will jump out at
you if they apply finally you need a
situation where you can deal with the
approximation you'll see two patterns
here a for performance optimizations
like our previous caching example where
if we're wrong we just lose some
performance we're not delivering an
incorrect ex an answer to our users and
B in domains where we're already outside
of binary correctness fraud and security
or machine learning and AI applications
often deal with risks and probabilities
and are in constant trade-offs cman
sketch can apply beautifully here all
told cman sketch is a useful tool for
your toolkit but be careful about
applying it unnecessarily this is easily
a situation where your interviewer can
get a gotcha moment that you don't want
the final data structure that we're
going to talk about today is hyper log
log I love how all these names are are
so fancy and Hyper log log is used for
cardinality estimation or basically
estimating the number of unique items
you'll see this in a bunch of different
places for instance websites are
constantly concerned with the number of
unique users this is the heart of daily
active users I don't care about the
number of page views I want to know how
many people are active on my site that
is in some sense a cardinality problem
and Hyper log log provides an estimation
much like cman sketch and Bloom filters
provide estimations on their underlying
the intuition behind hyper log log comes
from the Rarity of sequences if I'm
flipping a coin I can either get heads
or tails with equal probability 50% if
I'm flipping two coins I've got four
options I can get heads heads Heads
Tails Tails heads Tails Tails each of
those are 25% likely if you walked past
me and I told you I had gotten Tales
tales three times a good guess for you
is that I had flipped those two coins 12
times now if we were keeping track of
this very rare sequence of I don't know
how many coins and I had gotten this
many heads if I walked by or if you
walked by and I had told you that I had
gotten this sequence
you might guess that I had either been
there for a very long time flipping many
many coins or that I was cheating that
former interpretation is kind of at the
heart of hyper log log what we notice is
that the more times we're flipping the
more elements we're adding the more
likely it is that I start to see these
rarer sequences let's pretend I want to
count the number of unique visitors to
my site I might have an impression
stream and kind of a listing of all the
times that users have visited and what I
want to do is find the number of unique
visitors not the total number of views
and so a naive way that I might do this
is every time a visit comes in I will
add that user to a hash set and then at
the end of the day I can go and look at
the size of that hashset to know the
exact number of unique visitors this
works great and it gives me a precise
number but it has two problems one is I
have to store each of my users in that
hashset it's basically a pretty large
represent a and secondly it grows
unbounded as if I have a higher number
of users a higher estimate that means
the memory of this is going to continue
to grow so how can we estimate and do
this in a much more efficient way this
is where hyper log log comes in so with
Hyper log log when we get the
Impressions we're going to take that
username and we're going to Hash it and
what we're going to try to do is keep
track of the maximum number of trailing
zeros in those hashes so when Albert
comes in we see that we have one
trailing zero when Dan comes through he
has zero so we don't change our number
Brian similarly Fred has three so we'll
increment this to three Christina has
two that doesn't change our maximum
Brian we see Fred again and he has three
but that also doesn't change our maximum
which is quite convenient because Fred
visiting many many times shouldn't
change our estimate of number of unique
users so what can we say if we observe a
maximum of three trailing zeros well we
can come back to probability on this but
this basically gives us an estimate we
can basically assume that there was
eight unique users that were coming
through that's not a particularly
accurate estimate if you recall back we
had five actual unique users visiting
the site but it is an estimate and it's
the essence of how hyper log log works
if we kept going through this process
and saw a user which had 15 zeros our
estimate gets quite large we don't
expect that to happen very often but it
also demonstrates a flaw here if
somebody just happens to have 15 zeros
in their hash we don't want to blow up
our estimate just because that person
happened to come through so how can we
solve that problem the answer to this
problem is we're going to do it multiple
times with Hyper log log we're going to
maintain multiple registers which are
basically those counters or maximums of
the number of trailing zeros let's walk
through this in practice and I'll show
you what this looks like so when you
write or add an item to your hyper log
log you're first going to Hash it and
we're going to split that hash into two
parts the first is going to determine
the bucket or basically the partition of
the hyper log log and then the latter
part will be used to calculate those
number of trailing zeros that bucket
effectively indexes a register so if we
partition all of our ID space we're
going to maintain separate counters for
all of the IDS in that bucket and so in
this particular instance we are in
bucket number one and at bucket number
one we want to update our register so
that so that it reflects our Max
trailing zeros of one now if you think
about this partitioning if we were to
randomly do that we would expect all of
these registers to be approximately
equal and if you can imagine the free
Gap accident where I had 15 trailing
zeros in my hash that's only going to
appear in one of the registers and it's
not going to appear in the rest so what
does this look like when we read well
when we read instead of just grabbing
that one register and doing some math on
it we're going to take the harmonic mean
of all of the registers apply some
corrections on top and return that to
the user and this has two benefits one
that freak accident hash isn't going to
affect our estimate all that much
in part because it still needs to
average with all the other registers
which are going to be lower there's not
going to be multiple freak accidents
here the second thing is that this
averaging process allows us to smoothly
interpolate so whereas previously we can
estimate powers of two now we can
estimate any value because we have this
averaging that's going on so where does
hyper log logs show up in system design
interviews you're going to see this
centered a lot around analytics work
workloads where I need to determine the
number of unique users to the number of
unique posts that I saw but you'll also
see this in a few other places in
database systems I can use hyper log log
to estimate the cardinality of a column
it turns out that I may want to treat my
execution differently if there's only
two unique elements versus if there's
millions of unique elements another
place that I might see this is in Cache
analysis where I want to understand from
all of the incoming queries how many are
there how many keys do I need in order
to cach this effectively the key things
to keep in mind is hyper log log is used
in this places where we're counting the
number of unique items in a large data
set if your data set is small use a
hashset there's no point in bringing in
hyperlock log you need to have limited
memory available and the nice thing
about hyper log log is it's bounded you
choose it in advance but it also means
that you know generally speaking if
you've got more memory you can probably
use it successfully and then the last
thing like all of our other prior data
structures we need to be able to
tolerate some small estimation errors if
we're not okay with errors we have to go
with a more exact solution all right
let's wrap things up so we covered a lot
of ground today we talked about Bloom
filters cman sketch and Hyper log log
Bloom filters allow me to test for set
membership in an approximate way that
scales really well and save space count
Min sketch allows me to count elements
in a way that similarly saves space and
Hyper log log allows me to estimate the
number of unique items in a stream of
data or a large data set all of these
are going to apply in situations where
either a I have limited memory or B I
want to make some optimizations and
things that you should be on the lookout
for that might imply that you're going
to use these are places where either a
Your Design can tolerate a bit of error
or approximation or B you have a ton of
constraints so that interview that I
mentioned mentioned earlier about having
to run on Raspberry pies or embedded
systems is kind of a nod that maybe
these things will apply now be careful
it doesn't make sense to go and bring
Bloom filters or cman sketch in cases
where the data is small and it would
actually be easier both from a
development perspective and then also
from a debugging perspective to just use
a a proper precise data structure that's
going to give you an exact answer
there's no need to bring in approxim
unnecessarily but in those cases where
you do have some flexibility and it's
good to ask your interviewer whether you
have it these provide you a way to solve
problems that are otherwise intractable
if you run an estimate and you need a
hash table and it turns out that the
size of that hash table is intractable
maybe it's terabytes of data for some
small part of your system maybe you need
a bloom filter or count in sketch in
that particular instance I hope that
this was useful as always leave comments
if you've got questions or suggestions
or hey Stefan that wasn't very clear
I've also included in the links a
reference to a written version of this
which goes into greater detail for our
premium users of hello interview uh
that's definitely worth checking out if
anything was unclear really enjoyed this
and until next time talk to you then